I have a little diagram here that explains really really well some of the authentication methods that
we can use.
We have the traditional cookie based authentication which we have covered slightly in the security section
and also the modern token based authentication method.
And the cookie based authentication has been the default tried and true method for a long time.
As you can see here we have a browser and a server.
We usually have a POST request to authenticate or sign in and we send the username and password over
to the server.
The server checks this make sure that the passwords match and that the user exists.
And if everything goes well they send back a response saying OK you can sign in but they also send a
header that is set cookie with the session.
That is a cookie which is a random piece of string and this random piece of string is going to identify
this browser.
It's going to say anytime you want a request like API users here send me the cookie.
That is the cookie that I just sent you from the server.
And in this case of the browser wants to get the user and point it talks to the server again the server
sees that there's a cookie it's going to check this cookie to the wand that it's created over here.
It has to remember that cookie and make sure it matches similar to the way we had password that needed
to match.
So the server is going to work here.
It's going to be to do a bit of work.
It's going to say OK yeah I have this cookie.
I remember it I did assign you this cookie.
I know who you are.
So here is your information of the user.
You get name feedback and cookie based authentication is what we call stateful.
This means that an authentication record or session must be kept both in the browser as well as the
server.
The browser keeps their session cookie in the header and the server has to keep track of the cookies
that it's sent out to the clients in let's say a database of some other way to manage that data because
whenever they get a request they have to go through those cookies and figure out if any of them are
valid and which user information they pass based on that cookie and has to keep track of these active
sessions in the database.
And the beauty is that once the user let's say logs out of the app the session is destroyed both on
the client and server side.
Nice and simple.
Now token based authentication on the other hand is a little bit different.
And it's something that has gained more and more popularity over the last couple of years with single
page applications.
And when it comes to token based authentication the most common one that most people talk about is the
JWT tokin that is the Jason web token authentication which we're going to cover in this course.
Now let's take a look at a token based authentication a user logs in or tries to log in and authenticate
by sending username and password at the server checks that password make sure that everything works
with the user.
Yup the user exists yeah the password is right.
And they're going to send instead of a cookie like we did here.
They're going to send a token.
A job JWT token and this token which we're going to cover has some special information but it looks
quite similar with cookies in that it's all jumbled up piece of text and this token instead of being
in a set cookie like we have here is actually stored on the browser in something like local stores or
session storage.
Again something that will cover but this browser now remembers this token now.
Any time this browser or user needs to access information they have to send with their requests this
authorization hador that we give the bearer JWT and the token number again we'll cover this so don't
stress too much.
We just want to get the flow of how everything works here.
Now the interesting part happens here when the data token is sent with the request to get the user and
point the server doesn't have to actually store that information anywhere.
As a matter of fact the server doesn't really care about what sessions it's sent because they can simply
the way JWT tokens work is that they simply can verify that what they signed and the token that they
created is correct without touching a database without doing anything.
They simply run a dot verify method on it and they can send whatever data back to the browser.
And the interesting part is that within this JWT token there is user information that can be stored
as well.
Again this is something that we're going to come back to.
So this diagram is going to make a lot more sense towards the end but I want to introduce you to the
concept.
The main takeaway is that token based authentication in theory is stateless.
The server does not need to keep a record of which users are logged in or which have been issued.
Instead all the server needs to do is decode this JWT and make sure that it's a valid token.
By running this method verify and once a user logs out the token is destroyed on the client side.
But there's no necessarily an interaction that happens on the Bakhit.
Now why would we pick one over the other.
There's pros and cons to everything.
And I want to give you a heads up if you go online.
There's a ton of debates as to what people think and some people think that this is the best way to
do it.
Others think that this is the best way to do it.
And there is just a massive debate when it comes to session.
It's a really hotly debated topic and they're going to be people that really hate one way and really
like the other way.
So keep that in mind.
And I'm actually going to give you resources throughout this section that debate both topics so you
can make a decision for yourself.
The way I'm going to teach this section is I'm going to show you how to do a token based authentication
but also including sessions that are very similar to cookie based authentication so that you can decide
for yourself what is best.
I'm going to show you what I think is best personally but that doesn't mean it's the right way or that
you need to do it only this way.
There's many many ways to do it.
But like I said if you go online and start reading your head's gonna hurt about all the pros and cons
and options.
So I'm going to go over a few of these pros and cons now token based authentication.
The biggest advantage is the idea of tokens over cookies.
It is stateless.
The backend does not need to actually record or store the tokens in a database.
Each token is self-contained and contains all the data required to check its validity as well as convey
user information.
So the server's job is actually simplified.
The only job is then to sign the tokens.
And any time it gets a request to just verify the token nice and easy we just made the server work a
lot less which is always nice.
The other part is that unlike cookies which are meaningless strings in JWT you can actually have any
type of data you want inside of the JWT so you can have things like user ID or the name of the user
inside of this token so that when the server receives it it can actually see what type of data.
This JWT tokin contains another good thing about tokens is that unlike cookies that work really really
well with one single domain the classic browser server client relationship a token based approach makes
it really really easy for you to work with different API.
If your company had multiple IPs you can use the same JWT token across different API.
Because a JWT token is required and checked with each and every call as long as the token is valid the
requests can really be processed by anything.
And yes there are ways to do this with a cookie based authentication is all but it's definitely more
complicated.
Now the other thing is that with token based authentication it can serve both browser and native mobile
platforms like iOS and Android.
Because having cookies on native mobile platforms is actually while they just don't mix well together
it is possible to work with it.
But using cookies with mobile platforms is really really hard tokens on the other hand is nice and simple
works quite well.
All right so tokens are awesome let's just pick tokens and forget about cookies.
Well again as we know a senior developers there's always pros and cons the cons is that the size of
a JWT compared to a cookie is actually quite different JWT because they hold information are a lot bigger
and because you're sending them on every request that definitely increases the number of bytes you have
to transfer back and forth back and forth.
So depending on your situation the size of the game can become problematic.
The other part is that the fact that we're storing information in JWT about the user it can be dangerous
if we store anything sensitive about the user if the JWT token is stolen.
Bad people can actually decode it and see what's inside the JWT tokin quite easily.
And there's a few other things and I'm going to leave resources for you like I said this is a topic
that just goes deeper and deeper and deeper and there's a lot of points to consider.
So to simplify things I'm going to make it easy for you.
I'm going to show you how I implement authentication and you can grab whatever pieces you want for your
own application.
At the end of the day though we're going to make sure that our application is going to be secure and
manage these sessions in a way that won't make our app susceptible to bad people attacking us.
All right let's take a break and I'll see you in the next video.
Bye.